Project Proposal: OpenTelemetry Support Maturity Model (#3435)
open-telemetry/community: projects/otel-support-self-assessment.md

# OpenTelemetry Support Self-Assessment and Maintainer Guidance

## Background and description

OpenTelemetry has become the de facto standard for producing telemetry in cloud native systems, and a growing number of projects across the ecosystem emit their telemetry through it. But "supports OpenTelemetry" has become a binary claim that hides enormous variance in what a project actually delivers, and adopters absorb the cost of that variance when they integrate.

> This project aims to help maintainers close that gap themselves. It has two parts: opt-in tooling a maintainer can run against their own project's telemetry to get a factual report of what is emitted and where the gaps are, and maintainer-facing guidance on what good OpenTelemetry support looks like for different classes of projects.

Reviewer: probably here a first artifact to work on could be a classification model for the projects. 
categories into the CNCF landscape are more usage oriented we probably need something more architecture oriented (?).

Author: Yes, that's a good idea. Will add some wording around this being the first artifact to work on.

2. **Semantic conventions**: how consistently telemetry meaning aligns with OpenTelemetry semantic conventions, and how domain-specific extensions are introduced and stewarded.
3. **Resource attributes and configuration**: how identity, scope, and configuration are handled across environments, including correct use of resource attributes and standard `OTEL_*` configuration.
4. **Trace modeling and context propagation**: how traces are structured and how context flows through synchronous and asynchronous execution paths.
5. **Multi-signal observability**: how traces, metrics, and logs are supported together and correlated.
6. **Audience and signal quality**: who telemetry is designed for, how noisy it is by default, and how well it communicates meaningful system behavior.
7. **Stability and change management**: how telemetry evolves over time and how changes are communicated and managed once users depend on it.

The wording, granularity, and number of dimensions remain open for refinement as the tooling and guides are built. If a dimension does not earn its place in either deliverable, it should be dropped.

## Deliverables

> 1. **Self-assessment tooling.** Tooling a maintainer can point at their project's telemetry output and get back a report covering emitted signals, semantic convention alignment, resource attributes, standard configuration support, and context propagation, with concrete next steps and links into the guides. Delivered incrementally, starting with a prototype validated against volunteer projects. Requirements:
>    - Deterministic and objective. Where a check cannot be made automatically and objectively, it belongs in a guide, not in the tool's output.
>    - No score, grade, or level in the output.
>    - Run locally by the maintainer. This project does not host, collect, or publish results.
>    - Reuses existing rule sets, notably Instrumentation Score, rather than restating them.
> 
> 2. **Maintainer guides by project type.** Guidance on what good OpenTelemetry support looks like, with common pitfalls and worked examples:
>    - **Libraries**: adding native instrumentation, API-vs-SDK boundaries, and what to expose to the embedding application.
>    - **Services and infrastructure components** (databases, message brokers, proxies and gateways, controllers): emitting OTLP, writing and stewarding federated semantic conventions, and exposing standard configuration.
> 
>    OpenTelemetry Collector distributions are deliberately out of scope here; that class is covered by the separate Collector certification effort.
> 
> 3. **Publication on opentelemetry.io.** The guides published as community documentation, coordinated with SIG Docs on format and placement.
> 
> 4. **Companion blog post(s).** Announcing the guidance and tooling to the broader community, aimed at maintainers of projects that integrate with OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Project classification model.** A shared taxonomy of project classes, based on where a project sits architecturally with respect to telemetry rather than on what it does functionally. This is the first artifact, because both other deliverables depend on it: the tooling uses it to decide which checks apply to a given project, and the guides are organized around it. Classes are self-declared by the maintainer, never assigned by this project. 

2. **Self-assessment tooling.** Tooling a maintainer can point at their own project's telemetry to get a factual report of what is emitted and where the gaps are, with concrete next steps and links into the guides. Delivered incrementally.

**Scope for the first iteration: analysis of telemetry the maintainer already has.** The input is a captured OTLP payload produced by the project during something the maintainer already runs. The tool does not start the project, does not generate load, and does not re-run it under varying configuration. This keeps the first iteration deterministic and replayable, makes it usable in CI, and keeps the adoption cost close to zero.

 Explicitly deferred to a later iteration: anything that requires the tool to execute the project or vary its configuration, including whether standard `OTEL_*` configuration is honored and end-to-end propagation across process boundaries. Those are covered in the guides for now, and can be revisited once the payload-level checks have proven useful.

 Requirements:
   - Deterministic and objective. Where a check cannot be made automatically and objectively, it belongs in a guide, not in the tool's output.
   - No score, grade or level in the output, and no aggregate count that invites one.
   - Checks observable output, not implementation choices. 
   - Run locally by the maintainer. This project does not host, collect or publish results.
   - Reuses existing rule sets rather than restating them.
   - Reports what was *not* checked, so that an empty findings list is not mistaken for a pass.
   - Rule-to-class applicability expressed as data, so that classes and rules can be added without code changes.

3. **Maintainer guides by project type.** Guidance on what good OpenTelemetry support looks like, with common pitfalls and worked examples, organized around the classes above. 

OpenTelemetry Collector distributions are deliberately out of scope here; that class is covered by the separate Collector certification effort.

4. **Publication on opentelemetry.io.** The guides published as community documentation, coordinated with SIG Docs on format and placement.

5. **Companion blog post(s).** Announcing the guidance and tooling to the broader community, aimed at maintainers of projects that integrate with OpenTelemetry.
```

## Staffing / Help Wanted

### SIG

No new SIG is proposed. A working group will be formed under **SIG Communications**, mirroring how the [Ecosystem Explorer project](./ecosystem-explorer.md) is organized, with SIG Communications meetings used for project updates and coordination.

Coordination touch points:

- **SIG Semantic Conventions**, on convention alignment, federated conventions, and Weaver-based tooling.
- **SIG Docs / Communications**, on publication of the guides.
- **Instrumentation Score** and **Ecosystem Explorer** maintainers, on complementary positioning and rule reuse.

### Required staffing

#### Project Lead(s)

- **Kasper Borg Nissen** ([@kaspernissen](https://github.com/kaspernissen)), Dash0: author of the original draft; has been developing and validating the underlying framework through blog posts, talks, and direct engagement with cloud native projects.

> - **Graziano Casto** ([@graz-dev](https://github.com/graz-dev)), Akamas: proposed the opt-in self-assessment framing that this revision is built around, and has volunteered to co-drive the work. Also Tech Lead in CNCF TAG Developer Experience, which is a useful channel for validating the guides with maintainers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Graziano Casto** ([@graz-dev](https://github.com/graz-dev)), Akamas: proposed the opt-in self-assessment framing that this revision is built around, and has volunteered to co-drive the work. Also Co-Chair in CNCF TAG Developer Experience, which is a useful channel for validating the guides with maintainers.
```
